Coffee is a flowering plant which is being cultivated for its grains/seeds called ‘coffee beans’. Many coffee products including beverages are made from these freshly grown coffee beans. When it comes to plant size, these tress are small. Coffee plants are native to tropical areas of  Asia and South African continent. Coffee was introduced in India in 1936 near Chimanglur in the state of Karnataka. Coffee is one of the popular commodity crops plays major role in the world economy. Brazil occupies the number one position in coffee production in the world. In commercial aspect, the coffee is  major export crop for many countries across the globe. There are many species of coffee cultivated across the globe. However, “coffee Arabica” accounts for 80% of coffee production in the world. Other species of coffee is Coffee Robusta ( made from coffea canephora plants)  accounts for about 20% of world coffee production.

The coffee tree produces  purple or red cherries (edible fruits) and these cherries can consist  seeds (coffee beans). Coffee trees are bush or tree type that can reach a height of 12 feet. The coffee plant flowers have excellent  aroma and usually exists in white colour. Once coffee orchard is established, it can produce coffee beans up to 55 to 60 years. Generally, coffee plants  growing fruits beans/cherries) after 3 to 4 years of planting (especially Coffee Arabica). Coffee plants can be grown in pots and containers and even in back yards. Commercial farming of coffee beans is an excellent business and one can obtain desired  profits under ideal crop practices. Let us discuss more about coffee growing and its management practices in the following article.

Top Coffee Production States in India:- The following are major coffee growing states in India.

Karnataka
Kerala
Tamil Nadu
Andhra Pradesh
Odisha (Orissa)

Varieties (Cultivars) of Coffee:- There are hundreds of  varieties available  under Arabica and Robusta species. However, you must find with your local horticulture department for suitable variety for your local conditions.


 
Climate Requirement for Coffee Growing:- Climatic conditions play major role in coffee growing. The Coffee Arabica can be cultivated  at high altitude from 900 meters  to 1600 meters. However, it can be grown  well to lower elevations as well. The main disadvantage of cultivating coffee beans at high altitudes can  result in late maturity and the crop may be damaged due to frost conditions and high winds. When it comes to rain fall requirement, the coffee crop grows well with  an evenly  distributed annual rainfall of  2,200 to 2300 mm. This crop is very sensitive to high rainfall conditions and this may cause rotting of leaves and fungal disease. The Ideal temperature of  10°C – 28°C is required for good growth and yield. Coffee plantation requires shade in  regions where high temperatures are possible.

Soil Requirement for Coffee Growing:- Coffee crop may be grown on wide range of soils. However, the shallow soils (sandy loam) with good organic matter to virgin soils on steep mountain slopes or almost flat lands are ideal its cultivation. You must consider water balance of soil as this can play vital role in coffee growing. Commercial coffee growers should go for soil testing. Any soil nutrient deficiencies should be supplemented before starting a coffee garden. For high yields and quality produce, the pH of soil should be between 5.0 – 6.0.

Propagation, Seed Rate and Seed Treatment in Coffee Growing:- Coffee crop is  propagated by seeds and cuttings. Selection of quality seeds is very important in coffee growing. Make sure the seeds are heavy broad and boat shaped. Remove any pulp from seeds by hand and these seeds should be rubbed with ash in order to avoid any sticking. Coffee seeds should be allowed to dry under shade. Generally, 4000 to 5000 coffee seeds are required to cover one hectare land. It is recommended to sow these seeds 2.5 cm apart. It takes about 30 to 40 days for germination after sowing in the field or nursery beds. These coffee seedlings should be uprooted and transplanted into polythene bags or in nursery beds at spacing of 25 cm.

Preparation of Land, Transplanting and Spacing in Coffee Growing:- For better coffee orchard establishment, the land should be prepared very well by giving 4 or 5 ploughings and harrowing to bring the soil to fine tilth stage. As part of this preparation, remove any stones/debris/ and weeds from previous crops. Commercial coffee growers should consider soil testing to measure the soil fertility and suitability. Based on soil test reports, any nutrients  and micro nutrients should be supplemented  in the soil before planting the seedlings. In case of fertilizers applications such as phosphorus  and  lime,  these should be thoroughly incorporated  by ploughing and disking the soil several months before transplanting the coffee seedlings in the field.