Onions can be cultivated in a wide range of soils from sandy loam to clay loam with good drainage facilities. The optimum pH would be 6.5-7.5.

Suitable climatic conditions for Onion growth:
It is adapted to a temperature range of 13-24° C for vegetative stage and 16-21° C for the bulbing stage, 30 -35° C at maturity and harvest. The best performance can be obtained in mild weather without the extremes of cold, heat and excess rainfall.

Onion seed rate/quantity per hectare:

7 to 9 kg/ha.(Note: 1 ha = 2.48 acres).

Nursery raising of Onions:

Seeds are sown on raised beds of 1.2 m width and 3-4 m length. The seedlings will be ready for transplanting in 45-50 days after sowing.

Preparation of soil or field:

Plough the land to get fine tilth and incorporate FYM 20 tonnes/ha or 10 tons FYM and 5 tons poultry manure or vermicompost at the time of last ploughing. Form flatbed or broad-based furrow (BBF) for planting.
Spacing: 15X10 cm   for both

Apply 50% N and 100% P, K & S as basal dose and remaining 50% of N to be applied in two splits at 30 & 45 days after transplanting. The topdressing must be completed before bulb development.

Irrigation in Onion farming:

Irrigation is necessary at the time of transplanting/dibbling of cloves and light irrigation should be done on the third day after planting and subsequent irrigation will be done at   7-10 days interval depending upon the soil condition and season. Water the transplants immediately after planting. Because of the shallow root system, onions require frequent furrow irrigation. Avoid overhead irrigation, which causes foliage diseases. If the foliage has an unhealthy, yellowish tint the plants are being over-irrigated. The soil will be overly dry around an under-watered crop and may become cracked. Onions generally require 30″ of irrigation during a growing season and the closer to harvest, the greater the need for water. If the onion does not get enough water it will not make a large bulb. When the necks start falling over and the onions mature, watering should be discontinued and the soil allowed to dry.

Microirrigation and fertigation in Onion farming:

By using drip and sprinklers, irrigation should be done once in three days. The operating pressure for a drip system is 1.5kg/cm2 and for the rotary micro sprinkler is 2.5kg/cm2. Through drip, fertigation should be done by using nitrogen fertilizers (Urea). Apply 50% N as basal dose and remaining 50% of N to be applied in seven splits (10 days interval up to 70 days after transplanting) through the drip irrigation system.

Weed Control and management in Onion farming:

The crop should be kept weed free for good bulb yield. For the transplanted onion, pre-emergence application of Oxyfluorfen (Goal) @ 0.15-0.25 kg ai/ha or Fluchloralin (Basalin) @1.0kg/ha or Pendimethalin (Stomp) 3.5 l/ha combined with one hand weeding was found effective in both Kharif and Rabi seasons.
For onion nursery and direct seeded crop, application of Pendimethalin @3ml/litre just after sowing is found best in controlling weeds without affecting the germination, seedling growth and final stand.

Cropping rotation:

Crop rotation is very important in onion farming process Soybean in Kharif season followed by onion in rabi season is the best crop rotation which improves soil fertility as well as monetary returns.

Marketing of Onions:

Marketing is very easy, where you can supply to local wholesale stores or retail stores or even you can sell in government market yards.