Pomegranate is one of the commercial fruit crops of India. It is native to Iran (Persia).Pomegranate is known as a drought tolerant crop, yet regular irrigation is mandatory to commercial yield production.Water levels and optimal irrigation regime depend on a plurality of factors as soil type, tree size, physiological phase and potential evaporation.As a rule the tree needs little supplemental irrigation. The commonly used irrigation regime in pomegranate orchards relies mainly on the experience gained by growers and less on formal experiments.

Suitable Climate for Pomegranate Farming :

Pomegranate prefers dry climate. During fruit development, prolonged hot and dry climate is required. Optimum temperature congenial for fruit development is 38 degree C. In humid climate the fruits are severely damaged by pomegranate butterfly and do not develop sweetness. It is winter hardy and very drought tolerant. It can grow up to an elevation of 1850 meters.


 
Pomegranate grows well under semi-arid conditions and can be grown upto an altitude of 500 m. above m.s.l.. It thrives well under hot, dry summer and cold winter provided irrigation facilities are available. The tree requires hot and dry climate during fruit development and ripening. Pomegranate tree is deciduous in areas of low winter temperature and an evergreen or partially deciduous in tropical and sub-tropical conditions. It can tolerate frost to a considerable extent in dormant stage, but is injured at temperature below – 110 C.

Suitable Soil type for Pomegranate Farming :

It grows under wide variety of soils and can tolerate even alkalinity and salinity to certain extent.  However, best results are obtained in deep heavy loam and well drained soils.  It is sensitive to soil moisture fluctuations causing fruit cracking which is a serious problem of this crop.Well drained, sandy loan to deep loamy or alluvial soils is suitable for Pomegranate Farming.

Pomegranate Varieties :

In recent years  several new varieties have been developed and new orchards have come with well-known improved varieties.
Ganesh  :

This is a selection from ‘Alandi’ developed by Dr. Cheema at Pune which has revolutionized cultivation of pomegranate in Maharashtra state.  This has soft seeds and pinkish flesh with juice of agreeable taste and bears heavily.

Dholka  :

Popular variety of Gujarat with fruits of large size, rind greenish yellow, flesh aril pinkish white seeds soft, juice acidic.  It is a medium cropper.

Jodhpur Local  :

Medium sized fruit with hard rind, fleshy aril light pink, sweet, juicy, seed moderately hard.

Seedless (Bedana)  :

Ganesh  :

This is a selection from ‘Alandi’ developed by Dr. Cheema at Pune which has revolutionized cultivation of pomegranate in Maharashtra state.  This has soft seeds and pinkish flesh with juice of agreeable taste and bears heavily.

Dholka  :

Popular variety of Gujarat with fruits of large size, rind greenish yellow, flesh aril pinkish white seeds soft, juice acidic.  It is a medium cropper.

Jodhpur Local  :

Medium sized fruit with hard rind, fleshy aril light pink, sweet, juicy, seed moderately hard.

Seedless (Bedana)  :
Preparation of Land for Pomegranate Farming :

Land is prepared by ploughing, harrowing, levelling and removing weeds.

Planting in Pomegranate Farming :

 Planting Material :

Pomegranate is propagated vegetatively by cuttings, air layering or gootee.


 
Planting Time  for Pomegranate Farming :

Air layering is usually done during the rainy season and also in November-December.  Planting is usually done in spring (February-March) and July-August in sub-tropical and tropical regions respectively.

Plant Spacing in Pomegranate Farming :

High density planting is adopted in temperate regions. A spacing of 5-6 m. in northern India and also in the plains of Deccan plateau is usually followed.  High density planting with a spacing gives 2-2.5 times more yield than that obtained when the normal planting distance of 5 X 5 m. is adopted. Farmers have adopted a spacing of 2.5 X 4.5 m. Closer spacing increases disease and pest incidence.

Planting Method preferred in Pomegranate Farming :

Square system of planting is mostly adopted. Planting distance is decided on the basis of soil type and climate. A spacing of 4-5 m. on marginal and very light soils is recommended.
Pits of 60 X 60 X 60 cm. size are dug (at a spacing of 5 cm. in square system) about a month prior to planting and kept open under the sun for a fortnight. About 50 g. of 5% BHC or carbaryl dust is dusted on the bottom and sides of the pits as a pre-caution against termites. The pits are filled with top soil mixed with 20 kg. farmyard manure and 1 kg. super phosphate. After filling the pit, watering is done to allow soil to settle down. Cuttings/air layers are then planted and staked. Irrigation is provided immediately after planting.
Manures and Fertilizers in Pomegranate Farming :

The recommended fertilizer dose is 600-700 g. N, 200-250 g. P2O5 and 200-250 g. K2O /tree/year. Application of 10 kg. farmyard manure and 75 g. ammonium sulphate to 5 year old tree annually is adequate , whereas application of 50 kg. farmyard manure and 3.5 kg. oil cake or 1 kg. sulphate of ammonia prior to flowering is ideal for healthy growth and fruiting.  The time of application is December/January for ambe bahar, May/June for Mrig bahar and October/November for hasthe bahar.
The basal dose of farmyard manure @ 25-40 cart-loads /ha. besides the recommended doses of N, P and K should be applied to non-bearing trees in 3 split doses coinciding with growth of flushes during January, June and September. Fruiting should be encouraged from fourth year onwards. Nitrogenous fertilizer is applied in two split doses starting at the time of first irrigation after bahar treatment and next at 3 weeks interval, whereas full dose of P and K should be applied at one time. These should be applied in a shallow circular trench below tree canopy not beyond a depth of 8-10 cm. After application, fertilizers are covered with top soil and irrigated.
Pests & Disease Management in Pomegranate Farming : 

In Pomegranate Farming, Pomegranate butterfly and bark eating caterpillar are the common pests of Pomegranate.

The fruits are susceptible to fruit fly which needs to be controlled from flowering to button stage.  At this stage spray of sevin (carbaryl) 0.2% (200 gm/100 litre) or endosuplhan 0.05% at 10 days interval alternatively, must be given.

Fruit spot and fruit rot are the common fungal diseases for which proper and regular spraying are made.

Physiological disorder : Fruit cracking is a most serious physiological disorder in pomegranate which limits its cultivation.  In young fruits it could be due to boron deficiency but fully grown fruits crack due to moisture imbalances as there are very sensitive to variations in soil moisture and humidity.  Prolonged drought causes hardening of peel and if this is followed by heavy irrigation or down pour then the pulp grows and the peel cracks.  This problem can be overcome by

Maintaining soil moisture and not allowing wide variations in soil moisture depletion,
Cultivation of tolerant varieties,
Early harvesting not allowing the fruits to crack and
Spray of calcium hydroxide on leaves and on fruit set.
Irrigation/Water Supply:

Irrigation may be given depending on soil, climate and availability of water.First irrigation is provided in case of mrig bahar crop in the middle of May followed by regular irrigation till the monsoon sets in. Weekly irrigation in summers and that during winters at fortnightly intervals is recommended. The check basin system of irrigation is usually followed.The average annual water requirement through drip irrigation is 20 cm. Drip irrigation helps to save 44% on irrigation and 64% when sugarcane trash mulch is used. It also helps to increase the yield by 30-35%.

Training  and Pruning:

In Pomegranate Farming, Plants are trained on a single stem or in multi-stem system. Since the crops trained on single stem training system are more susceptible to pests viz. stem borer and shoot hole borer, the other system is more prevalent in the country.
Pruning is not much required except for removal of ground suckers , water shoots, cross branches , dead and diseased twigs and also to give shape to the tree. A little thinning and pruning of old spurs is done to encourage growth of new ones.
