Sugarcane is widely grown crop in India. It provides employment to over a million people directly or indirectly besides contributing significantly to the national exchequer. Sugarcane growing countries of the world lay between the latitude 36.7° north and 31.0° south of the equator extending from tropical to subtropical zones. Sugar cane originated in New Guinea where it has been known for thousands of years. Sugar cane plants spread along human migration routes to Asia and the Indian subcontinent. Here it cross-bred with some wild sugar cane relatives to produce the commercial sugar cane we know today.

Climatic Condition for Sugarcane Farming :- Sugarcane is  considered as essentially a tropical plant. It is a long duration crop and thus it encounters all the seasons’ viz., rainy, winter and summer during its life cycle. The Sugarcane plant grows best in tropical hot sunny areas. The “ideal” climate for production of maximum sugar from sugarcane farming is characterized as:

A long, warm growing season with a high incidence of solar radiation and adequate moisture (rainfall) – the plant uses from 148 to 300g of water to produce 1.0g of dry substance.
A fairly dry, sunny and cool, but frost free season for ripening and harvesting – moisture percentage drops steadily throughout the life of the sugarcane plant, from 83% in very young cane to 71% in mature cane, meanwhile sucrose grows from less than 10 to more than 45% of the dry weight.

Suitable Soil for Sugarcane Farming :- Soil testing before planting is desirable while setting up a sugarcane farming as it helps in determining the optimum quantity of macro and micro nutrient application. Chemical constraints in the soils, such as acidity and low fertility, are relatively easy to correct or control.

A well drained, deep, loamy soil with a bulk density of 1.1 to 1.2 g/cm3 (1.3-1.4 g/cm3 in sandy soils) and total porosity, with an adequate balance between pores of various sizes, is higher than 50%; ground water table below 1.5 to 2.0 m from soil surface and an available water holding capacity of 15% or more (15 cm per meter depth of soil is considered ideal for sugarcane cultivation).In sugarcane farming , the optimum soil pH is about 6.5 but sugarcane can tolerate considerable degree of soil acidity and alkalinity. Hence, it is found growing in soils with pH in the range of 5 to 8.5. Liming is required if pH is less than 5.0, or gypsum application if pH is more than 9.5. Nematode infestations are likely to occur in very sandy soils.


Sugarcane Planting Seasons across India :-
 
In India, sugarcane is planted thrice a year in October (autumn), February-March (spring) and July (adsali).
Adsali planting is quite common in Maharashtra while autumn and spring plantings are more common in northern India.
Under North Indian conditions, sugarcane, by and large, is planted in spring.
Sugarcane requires about 25-32°C for good germination. This temperature requirement is met twice in north Indian conditions i.e. in the month of October and also in the months of February-March.
Autumn planting of sugarcane is done in the month of October.
For good yields, planting should be completed up to 20th October.
Delay in planting may cause reduction in yield as germination of sugarcane is reduced due to low temperature in late planting.
Spring cane is planted in February-March. March is the best time for cane planting in Punjab and Haryana, February-March in Uttar Pradesh and January-February in Bihar.
The planting time is advanced as we move towards east. In Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh, Maharashtra and Karnataka cane planting is done in December-February.
Land Preparation for Sugarcane Farming :- Every time a new crop is planted is absolutely essential to bring the soil to fine tilth for proper germination of the sets and field emergence and root growth. Tillage is the physical manipulation of the soil with appropriate implements to loosen the surface soil layer.

Planting Methods in Sugarcane Farming :-
Basically there are 4 planting methods in Sugarcane Farming which are described below :

A) Ridge and Furrow Method
B) Flat Bed Method 
C)  Rayungan Method 
D) Trench or Jawa Method